Always.
For example, here we have, to give you a general view, 350,000 Greek documents from the Byzantine Empire till today.
My goodness.
Almost 13,000 Romanian documents, because the monastery was very much, after the fall of Constantinople,
the Romanian princes became the benefactors and the continuation of Byzantium.
Because Romania was a province of the Roman Empire and later of the Byzantine Empire.
And there were also Christians, the Romanians from the very first century.
Whereas the other Eastern Europeans, Slavs, Russians, Serbians, Bulgarians, not Bulgarians, Bulgarians are actually Turks.
But then they mix with the Slavs.
So the other
for example, Ukrainians, Lithuans, etc., etc., they became Christians by the Byzantines in the 11th century, beginning 10th, 11th century.
So there's continuity, and that's why they've been welcomed here.
They have their... And because of the power that the Tsar had, and also the Moldavians, the Romanian princes, the Turks didn't exterminate all the Greeks.
They could have done that and finish up the whole thing and create a new era, a new empire called Turkish Empire.
But yet Byzantium was alive, as you have seen, not only here, but also the rest of Greece, Asia Minor, Cyprus, the islands.
It was alive in the life of the people.
But they were now under this cruel domination, which unfortunately the USA supports.
very much, especially in Cyprus.
This is politics.
Put a bracket... I don't remember doing it.
My politics, I've come from Cyprus, and NATO, unfortunately, gave the blessing for the Turks to invade that little island and kill the people, etc., etc., and NATO is still giving all the force to Turkey.
Whereas for Kuwait,
The USA liberated in the night because they have interest.
For us, for Cyprus, they have other interests, so they didn't care for the people.
And we have 5,000 people killed, half the population, about 250,000 refugees even today.
And there is no light in the future.
And this is because the American policy, not the people of America, the American policy is very cruel.
It is very much directed by the Jewish lobby.
There's no joke with that.
But not the American people.
You always distinguish between the two.
I know that because I was in America for four years, and my parents were there.
And we know what people they are there, and how the policy, unfortunately.
Well, this is always for the strong nation, like Rome, which was a strong nation, to make injustice.
many times, when the Russians, the Soviets, when the Chinese, they have the power.
We have these kind of things, you know, interesting things like that.
The small people kind of survive sometimes, or they struggle.
Yeah.
We hope that the Greek people in America, who have all... Which is a very strong group, by the way.
Which is a very strong group, I know.
They're trying their best to
to create a friendly climate which we would like to have very much with the USA as well as with all the countries because we like peace.
We like peace.
Greeks were never people of war.
Only once actually they made conquering war during the Alexander time, during the times of Alexander.
Yet through his conquering he wasn't killing people unless they were very much resisting him.
Usually he was accepted and he spread
Hellenism, which eventually became a vessel for the gospel, which was written in Greek and spread in the Greek language, etc., etc.
So were people of peace, were the Turks, were people of violence, because this is how it was their culture.
They were shepherds, and then they became bandits.
And then they saw Byzantium, ooh, why don't we sit on their throne?
And they managed to do that with the help of Martin and the Western
powers, especially from the 13th century, when the Franks, Western Europeans, came and conquered Byzantium and made a big crash.
And after that, although Byzantium still was elevated in the theology, the arts, et cetera, the military was very small, and the Ottomans came and conquered the whole thing.
And that's 1453 when it fell.
They came, the Franks conquered the Crusaders, you know, the fiasco of Crusaders.
They conquered in 1204, Constantinople, and they left in 1261, and there was another two centuries of glory of Basantium, but as I said, military was very, very weak.
They lost all the provinces, and so it was easy for their Turks to come in.
And then there was no crusaders to help the Constantinople.
They lost their will for that, didn't they?
That looks like a very old trunk there.
Yes, we have many of these.
Usually here we find many, we discover many treasures.
And now I don't know whether we have anything in it.
Oh, well, we have a lot of...
maps, we are collecting all kinds of maps we have here because we have maps from the 19th, 18th century and in many languages, all kinds of languages and we know that people appreciate it very much because we have, especially after the collapse of the Soviet
Big changes, you know, with boundaries.
That's exactly right.
That is why some Americans came and they photographed the oldest geography of Ptolemy, which we have here, which I will show you.
And they photographed the whole thing.
And then two weeks, the three small Lithuania, Estonia, and Letonia,
they make a revolution.
And many of the fathers here say, hmm, there might be something there CIA perhaps.
Who knows?
Anyway, so these are the Romanian archives, which are now studied by a Rumanologist, as we call him.
He's a professor in Athens.
He's half Greek and Romanian.
and he lives in Athens for many years with two of his graduate students.
They're making a very good work.
They are now translating them in modern Greek and of course then we have to have them in English for all the experts.
The language usually is either Slavic or Romanian or
And some of them, some of them, which we included in the Romanian archive, they come even from Tsars.
But we said, let's put together, since they are Flavonics and Romanian, let's make them one team.
But because most of it, the majority are Romanian, from princes of, around the principalities of Danube.
Before Romania became a big country, last century, it was
Transylvania, Moldavia, and Vlahia.
And these three principalities were very much helping these monasteries, especially, as well as other monasteries, but very much these monasteries.
That is why the Romanians, they don't have their own monastery.
They have three skates, but they don't have their own monastery, yet for them, Vatopelli is their own monastery.
And you can see the continuation of this tradition.
We have six Romanian fathers in the monastery.
Here's six.
Okay.
And many others who want to come.
Now here are documents, documents, documents.
Also documents which are more contemporary with the so-called metohia.
Metohia is a word for properties which were given as a gift by pious Christians to monasteries in order so that it will become a source of
income for the monks since the monks cannot work outside and have their own money since they are dealing with praying and worshipping God and things like that in order to help them to have people come and work and build or do other things to find source of income I used people to reach and grow up they used to give the land or they used to give a lake or
animals, houses, real estate, things like that.
And these are the deeds, the documents.
Exactly.
Unfortunately, many are lost.
Because they go back many, many centuries.
Also because of the so-called catastrophe of Hellenism in Minor Asia.
We still call it Minor Asia, as you can see.
in 1922, when the Turks eliminated almost all the Greeks, killing them or just sending them away when they came to Greece.
These people, thousands and thousands of people, came here without anything.
I went to a village outside of Ephesus last week, a beautiful little village, and up on the top of the hill are two Greek churches.
And they're abandoned, and there isn't a single Greek in the town.
The churches are still there.
But I said, gee, are there any Greeks around?
Not the Greek community of God.
The prophets are saying that pretty soon, since the Turkish nation was established of blood, it's going to be wiped out with blood.
It's the divine justice which balances and controls everything.
And so we know people who have told us, Turks, who have told us that when the feast of that travel, which is completely deserted, and there are no Greeks around the area, in the night we see lights and we hear chanting.
We go there and we see nothing.
We come back again, we see the same thing.
This is a proof that Vizatim is still alive there.
And...
One of the reasons why the Turks are so aggressive is because they know that they are not in their own house.
They're sitting on somebody else's seat.
That makes them nervous, as you know.
It should.
So here, as we see, documents, document, documents.
So this is now the second floor?
This is the basement.
Oh, this is the basement.
This is the one we were... The first, then we're going to go to the second and the third.
There is a top floor.
Yes, our grandfather Joseph the Hissihast, who I mentioned.
Yes.
And he is the root, our Abraham, of our, of Vatoperi, Dionysiu, Philotheou Caracallou Custamonitou, Xyropotamou, six, yes.
What are his dates, his years?
He lived between, he was born in 1898 in the island of Paros and died in 1959 at the New Skit on the other side of the office with our father Joseph also, Joseph of Vatateri.
Do you have one?
a hospital?
I'll show you.
It's next to this tower.
Sorry, you don't have to show me.
I just wondered if monks get sick.
We had a hospital here because the monastery was big and people from the cells could come here or from the skits and we still also today there were always some monks who knew medicine.
They could apply to that.
Of course today we have
development in medicine.
It's going to return.
They are changing the... We have generators.
And we use them.
We use different monies, different denies.
It depends also on what we are working.
It's a big monastery, one kilometer perimetre.
We have discovered in manuscripts 8,800 monks in Byzantine times.
And now we are doing the monastery in such a... So you discovered eight hundred monks... Eight hundred, but there were times that there were hundreds of monks here, even eight hundred.
As many as... As many as eight hundred, exactly, in the Byzantine times.
And from this monastery Hilandara came, because the Serbian king Simeon and his son Prince Savas, the two greatest saints of Serbia, of the Serbian church, became monks here.
Whereas their queen became a nun in Serbia.
And then an influx of Serbian monks followed them.
And they wanted to make their own monastery.
And Vatopedi gave them a property of their own.
And they made Hilandar.
And so Hilandar is a daughter of Vatopedi.
Also, we lost many of these properties.
I didn't finish it in 1922 when we gave it to all these refugees.
Especially we had a lot of property in Khalkidiki.
The area around, you know, Cassandra, the Three Legs, and around Thessalonica, all this area.
And we had many properties, and the fathers, due to the emergency, they just gave the whole land to the people.
The government promised to give us money, and we're still waiting for it.
You know, we governments.
Every government when it comes to money.
You did that on the way down.
I should have warned you.
No, that's fine.
I've got a strong head.
I have.
In my first year, when I became a monk here, I so many times bumped my head.
And if you used to be... Let's hold on here today.
Yes, sir.
You can sit on the items.
Look at these.
Marvelous, sir.
Yes, it is.
Oh, yes.
And even here, you will see also... I have a question for you, Father.
Are these inscribed pieces of stone, are they considered manuscripts?
Not manuscripts, are they considered documents in a way?
Yes, of course, because they are giving us information on writing.
It doesn't have to be papyrus and parchment, it might be marble.
This is pertinent to my new book as well, because I'm dealing with technology, the changing nature of information transmission.
For example, over here you see,
These are from Hellenistic, even classical Athens, 4th century BC, the death, the mourning of the dead lord of the house.
And this is a sign, a symbol that his life has finished and he's going to another life.
Because the ancient Greeks saw that man, in order to add a few things to what Father Athenius didn't say to you, they saw that man has conscience, choosing, willingness, memory, and many other things that animals possess.
they realize that these things are things that are qualities of an emotional being.
And that is why this means, according to an expert who told us a few years ago, his life on the earth is finished and he's going into another one.
So are these here because they're beautiful or because they transmit information?
It's because the fathers discovered them here and there.
There were six good scenes on Athos
according to historians like Herodotus and others, which you will find in books.
So this goes back to classical and Hellenic.
Classical and Romans.
You can see Roman times as well.
And these were found here.
Yes, they were found here, and we placed them here.
Lately, just a few weeks ago, we discovered big jars in our garden while we were at Ford.
Yes, something like that, bacon, amphores.
Pythos is more than amphores, you know, it's something like this, but we're talking about huge... It's just salmon after all these centuries.
Yes, from the Hellenistic time, according to the expert who came here.
And so now we're not going to use that for the garden.
We're making new plantations because we're becoming more and more people, more and more guests, and we want to have
you know, using organic gardening and things like that, and we want to expand.
But every now and then we discover something archaeological.
Who are the guys, the monks?
The monks, ourselves, and of course we have some workers who are coming now from the ex-Soviet Union.
Do they live here in Athos?
They live with us, and if they behave, they stay with us.
Sometimes they don't, they get kicked out.
It's not easy to stay, especially for young men, to stay in a place where there's no TV entertainment.
Let's just leave it at that.
There are a few, though, who are clever, and they become baptized here, because although their countries were traditionally orthodox due to communism, they were above them.
And look how strongly orthodoxists come back to Russia.
I was told...
Two, three years ago, by some priests who are also professors in the Academy of St.
Sergius in Moscow, 400 monasteries in a few years have been filled with monks and nuns.
And they are making more and more and more and more.
Can you describe briefly some of the things that are here?
Yes.
Here we have a couple of showcases in order to demonstrate to the people, representatively if I may say so,
Here we have from our collection which we said is 2050 manuscripts.
By the way we are still discovering manuscripts.
Now where do you discover them when you say you discover them?
We are discovering because we may discover it when an old father from the previous world who dies, he has many books.
We go and we collect the books and half of the book is handwritten.
Or a book is a pure manuscript of the 17th century, of the 16th century.
we may discover while looking at the books we are newcomers by the way only eight years in this monastery only eight years now who's newcomers now we we were at the the brotherhood was at the new street where joseph de hisi has died i see and then became about 15 20 people and then they were asked to come here because there were only few old monks here in the 60s in 63
we had the millennium of Monathos, actually the millennium of Lavra, but they said of the whole Monathos.
And the people who came here, many prestigious people, patriarchs, kings, etc., they were saying that we're actually doing the funeral of Monathos, because there were only less... During the funeral of this?
Yes, they were also doing the funeral of this, quote-unquote, because there were less than 700 monks,
And the average age was 60 years old, something like that.
This was of all of us?
Yes, that was of all of us.
So it was down to 700.
700, and the age was very... And this is in the 60s?
In the 60s.
It's about 2,000 now, isn't it?
Now it's 2,000, and the average age, as you have seen, is...
25, may I say?
I wrote this down four times in my notebook today, how young these men are.
You will find young men in monasteries, if you go like, for example, see Monopetra, Grigoriou, the monastery that you will see, Vion, Lavra, you will see a lot of young people.
So you say the new brotherhood, you came from which?
From the new skeet.
It's a skeet which belongs to the monastery of St.
Paul.
And that is where St.
Joseph de Hesihas... And it's called the New Skeet.
New Skeet.
That's its name.
New.
N-E-W.
Something which is new.
Because it was newer than the other ones.
And it was at the... It's near St.
Paul's Monastery on the other side of the peninsula.
There St.
Joseph de Hesihas died in 59.
And one of his students, our Joseph, the Vatopendian,
made his own brotherhood, and eventually they came here.
And they assumed, not assumed, but they... The Patriot for Santinople.
And the Holy Community, which is the government of the Lord Athos, decided to bestow the power to the new brotherhood of Father Joseph of Antipati.
because the old monks were unable to run these monasteries.
There were about 10 and they were 70 years old, many of them.
Now we have only two of them.
All of them are gone.
They died.
And this is really responsible for this dynamic.
It sent Joseph to the Hissi house.
as well as his energiosity.
But the attitude that is... They projected this whole dynamism is the word you used earlier.
Yes, dynamismos.
It's something, and the statistics, as I said before, about the millennium and the funeral, etc., they said that you are doing the funeral.
Well, Athos we should, maybe, the Junta in 67 was thinking to
pull all the monks in one monastery, one of the big monasteries maybe, and turn the rest of the monasteries, museums, hotels, things like that, and make it a forest for hunting for their royalties and for the VIPs and the presidents of the countries and things like that.
But they didn't count that there is a lady here, a governess.
A woman.
A Virgin Mary, the only woman who can come here.
From the 70s,
Suddenly, we have a reverse.
The hunter is gone.
The hunter is gone, yes.
Number one.
The thing is that young men, most of them, the graduates, professionals, they came with having full knowledge of what they were going to do.
Sacrifice their whole life and their whole personality in order to come here and service God.
in the church.
Did the Junta really seriously propose doing this?
It was one of the ideas.
They tossed it out?
Yeah, so to speak, they tossed it out.
Just to see, like we call it a trial balloon, see how people respond.
Let's see how people respond, exactly.
Also, others was, we had also another thing.
A gentleman came, I remember, some years ago, and he said to the fathers here, I would like to make a hotel here,
and I can give you a lot of money, and we can make it a special hotel, Byzantine hotel, you know, things like that.
See, they don't understand.
But they don't understand what's going on here.
It's like we say back home, they don't get it.
Even the people in Greece, they didn't understand Mao's house.
Because there was this disruption due to the Turkish occupation, ignorance,
There was a turn towards the technology and science of Western Europe.
So what attracts the special person who comes here?
Divine grace.
You answered that immediately.
Nothing else.
Because if it is not divine, there is nothing else for us here.
We have no money, no property, no pleasures, no our own family, which is something very natural.
We didn't hate our family and we came here.
You loved yourself.
We loved them and we prayed for them more than we would do outside.
And they have benefited most of them.
Usually the first people who benefit are relatives, spiritually speaking.
And we came out of love for God and His Mother.
And we stay here because they provide us divine grace.
The energies of the Holy Spirit.
Because here, as you can see, we wake up at 3.30.
And we work without being paid.
There's no vacations.
We cannot travel or do whatever we like without the permission of the abbot.
And, of course, by being obedient, that doesn't mean that we have lost our freedom.
No, we are seeking freedom, the spiritual freedom, the freedom from our passion.
Look at the freedom that people are talking about today.
They say, I want to be free.
Do whatever I like.
You're doing whatever your passion is telling you to do, usually.
Here we're trying to halt this passion.
How long have you welcomed pilgrims like myself to come?
Have you always welcomed people to come?
Of course.
Because the people built the monasteries together with the kings.
The people give the taxation and the people came and worked for this.
Of course the kings were the overseers and they make the plans and the decisions and things like that.
But the people... So it belongs to the people?
It belongs to the Orthodox people.
Obviously.
But also to the rest of the people because we welcome anyone who might come here.
And as you can see, we have fathers here who were non-orthodox, became orthodox here, and then became monks.
And also we have a lot of foreigners, let's call them foreigners, because we don't like this.
We see humanity as one.
Like Adam was one family.
We are actually one family.
And especially after Christ came here from Pentecost, we are one.
Okay, I am Greek and he is...
Italian, and he's Russian, and he's English, etc., etc., but, and other attributes, the language, and other differences, but we have one common thing, faith.
And this is a model here, please underline, model, of a republic, a real republic.
We are so many people, 2,000 people, coming from all kinds of countries, even from Brazil, Chile, let me think, another...
remote place, like England, or like Africa, just name it, Australia, Africa.
Do you have some black people here?
They don't stay with us, they go back to continue their missionary work, but they come to us, Orthodox, from Africa, and they spend time with us, they become priests, then they go back and they continue their work, they build churches, parishes, even communities, monastic communities lately.
since we have a revival here on Athens.
And now all these people are together, they are different in so many things, yet they have one common thing, faith, the gospel.
And because of that, they are united.
Of course, you will hear, ah, we have chorus.
Okay, in every family we have chorus and differences, things like that.
But still, whatever differences might be, we are all well together.
Someone may say, yes, but you have a Russian monastery, and you have a Bulgarian monastery, and you have a Serbian monastery, and you have Romanian skits, and Iviro was Georgian, Iviro, Georgian actually, it was, now it's, I, it's, people there who live up mostly weeks.
Yes, these are historical reasons.
It's because of the Turkish occupation, and they wanted to make it strong in order to be
not to have a dominion, the Turkish rule.
But as you can see in our monastery now, we have a mosaic of people.
And this is happening in other monasteries, if you visit them.
When you go to Trivia, you will find a British.
If you go to see Monogatari, you will find French and Germans.
If you go in, let me think, here, you will find Romanians, Brazilians, the Czech.
Of course, the majority is still Greek.
Because, as we said before, somehow God has given the leadership to the Greeks.
And I'm not saying this out of Shoveghism.
It's God's plan, as He worked in the very beginning with the people of Israel, then the succession of the apostles was with fathers.
And they were, of course, also called Romans only, because they became all of the Roman sinners.
Because Romans or Greeks was the same thing.
There was a distinction.
The distinction was made later on for politics, with the theism and things like that.
Behind this is politics.
So there are Charles Marlous, you know, the Holy Roman Empire.
They tried to make an empire so that their real Roman Empire, Byzantium, would be slowly, slowly wiped out.
And Roman Catholicism came up.
It didn't happen, thank goodness.
So, let's go back to some of these.
Okay, here we have a few from our collection.
This is a geography of Ptolemy.
It was taken out in the exhibition in Celerica last year.
It is the oldest copy.
The original was done, of course, as you know better than I do, in the second century BC in Alexandria by Ptolemy.
And this copies the oldest, 13th century.
And the monk used the, in order to draw all the maps, he used the, I don't know how you call it in English, the parameters, the numberings of the globe.
Meridians.
Meridians, parameters.
Longitude, latitude.
That's it, that's it.
I understand what you mean.
I don't remember this one.
I have to look at the dictionary.
So he did it, and as you can see, it is very... We have just printed it, by the way.
Sufeximoid copies, yes.
Yes, we have made also a copy, which I don't know whether we are sending this, because it was just been published a few days ago.
And here you can see Middle East.
since the Orient has somehow the beginning of the civilization, we usually have this page.
This was in the Thessaloniki exhibit.
Exactly.
From... what was it?
It was August of... I bought the book, so it'll be in there.
Okay.
It has about... how many maps?
Of the three continents.
That's fine, yeah.
You know, North America or...
It's not known yet.
I don't remember the number of the maps.
Is it 40?
You will find it in the book.
I have the book.
You have the book, okay.
And we have everything there, except two pages written.
The British stole them.
But they're in the British Museum, and in our edition, we added these two pages.
And now we're about to make an exhibition worldwide, which we haven't talked.
We will talk about that later on, because I'm going to give you a lot of information.
It wouldn't be the right time to tell you about this.
We're going to have an exhibition, maybe even in New York.
Really?
Yes, with things from here.
Is Vatopedi or apples?
Vatopedi.
Vatopedi, as well as relics from Vatopedi, which are now in museums and libraries in the whole world, like Dabarton, Ongs, the mosaic portable icon of St.
John Chrysostom, or like a lot of, in Moscow, Hermitage,
That was a landmark.
So we're going to bring those which are outside of Adoferi, and now we're trying our best, it's not easy, this is in the process, to get also a few from here, but a few and very special, very, very special.
Remarkable.
Which haven't been exposed.
And where was this done?
This was done in the 13th century, and by a monk, as I said.
Here?
Here.
The second part of this
codex is the geographical information by Strabon, who lived in the first century AD.
He was a Cretan, but he lived in Rome.
That's why most people think that he's Latin, but he was a Cretan.
No, I know him.
I quote him in my book, which I'm sending out.
And so here you have a perfect geography of antiquity and medieval times for military purposes.
for governmental purposes, etc., etc.
It is very, very important.
Unbelievable.
Here from the same century, 13th century, the first eight books of the Old Testament, and it's called Okta Tefk.
Okta Tefk.
You know this.
It's a term.
Beautiful illuminations, 153 miniatures.
How many miniatures?
153.
It is all, I think this is also in the book.
If it is not, you will write to me and I will give you additional information because now I don't have everything in my head.
And we have the text and commentaries by the Fathers and beautiful illumination, 700 years old, and you can see how beautiful they are.
This is probably the most beautiful illustrated manuscript of our collection of manuscripts here.
No, in this book, the Octateth, you would suggest is the most beautiful.
Yes, this is not only my own experience, it's also I've heard experts, Byzantinologists who came here, and they said, this is magnificent.
I can't remember.
Maybe.
But this will be in the book I've got today.
Yes.
If it's not in the one book, it's going to be in the other.
But I think also that one went out.
I think so.
We send a lot of relics because we have so many.
We were quite rich in that.
Now, 11th century, four Gospels.
Tetra Evangelion.
Tetra, cuatro, four.
11th century.
Here you can see also beautiful miniature of Mark.
And here is the beginning of the Gospel.
Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
That's gold with lapis lazuli.
This is 900 years old.
They were using and believing.
We have some other cosmos with absolutely so perfect manuscripts that you would say, this is childish.
Believe me.
But I cannot take you there.
It's a treasury and you have to have the board has to sign and things like that.
Maybe next time... Everything takes time.
You know, it will cooperate more and more.
You will gain the trust of the boat here, and they will give you... I totally understand.
And they will ask you to go there.
This is a great treat right here.
I am grateful for everything that you're doing now.
I believe that the Virgin has brought you here.
I can see some more things behind all this.
I can see the blessing of the Virgin to you and to your family.
You probably have some artists up there who wanted you to come here.
I think so.
It was my first choice, you know.
I was in the square yesterday and they were talking about the close monasteries.
And I just said, I want to go to Vagopedi first.
They said, but that's too far away.
Nobody would drive me out here.
Yes, it's due to the sea with the rock.
I stayed in a little monastery near the square and then I came out this morning.
But here we are.
So it's...
It was quite strange how we left together, you know.
You were there.
And you know, at that time, on Sundays, I'm never out of my cell.
I'm usually in my cell praying and reading the Father's.
But it happened... It's remarkable.
...that I had to do something, and then it happened that you didn't give your paper at the dog, ma'am, and it happened that somebody said to me, hey, please, you know English, help this man, and et cetera, et cetera.
Amazing.
No.
Another gospel.
This is a liturgical gospel.
It's a gospel which is used for the services.
That means it tells to the priest when to read on the feast of the Domitian of Our Lady Theotokos on Paschal Day.
So it's the four gospels, but in certain pieces for the certain day.
Fourteenth century, and you can see there are many illuminations.
Breathtaking, breathtaking.
You know, I should remember if you... this exhibition, the Getty Library has some... Oh!
Well, it seems we're getting these to the meat of the whole thing.
Fourteenth century.
Oh, my pen.
And here we have some illumination.
Christmas.
It's become also a postcard, by the way, postcard, and it's very... the Friends of all of us have used it.
Matthew, you can see the gold, shining, which means the uncreated energies of God, what we call grace, which is what the Holy Spirit gave to the apostles and to all the Christians by their baptism.
And we have it potentially, potentially,
And we will become energized if we follow Christ and His commandments.
And then we will become like kings, which is the sole purpose of man's existence, to become a god by grace.
And this, again, you said is what century?
This is fourteen?
Fourteenth century.
A highlight of theology, by the way, theology and arts.
Although it was only one century before its fall.
Here it tells to the priest, you're going to read
When this is July, this is August, we commemorate the Maccabees, martyrs, Jewish martyrs, 1st of August.
We commemorate, for example, Christmas, let's find Christmas.
October, October, November, St.
Barbara, here.
My daughter is Barbara.
Barbara, here she is.
And...
Let's find Nicholas.
Nicolau.
Here you are.
It tells him here with all these strange writings, their abbreviations actually.
It's Evangelio, a page and the number so that the priest can go there.
It was used.
Eventually it was placed here.
The illuminations as you can see are beautiful.
Wonderful.
This book was prepared for the priest.
Exactly.
So why did it need those illuminations?
Because they were very grateful people.
And they wanted to give to the gospel a special prestige.
So when you open up, they put this gold and things like that, so you know it's a sacred book, first.
Second, God became man.
So the world became flesh.
We want to represent all these things.
We no longer have the problem of the Old Testament.
Do not make an image of graven things for any other gods.
No, we have no threats.
No threats because we know who God is and we can represent Him as a man.
Because He became a man without losing His perfect deity.
And that is why we represent His transfiguration, His baptism by St.
John.
Would this have been done here too?
Some of them, yes, some of them at Constantinople and sent to us.
One has to sit down and see the history of each Codex, and I'm not the expert.
And what does this say on that?
Here, this is a thing which it was placed a couple years ago.
What is it?
It says Evangelion, Gospel.
That's the Gospel.
Crucifixion.
It gives here the main feasts, so it makes it more interesting.
If you have illuminations, just only the words, not only the words.
Besides, the Byzantine art is expressions, is giving you messages.
That is why we do not very much like the Renaissance style, because it gives you the reality.
It gives you the reality, quote-unquote.
It gives you how things are.
We know how things are.
You know, the body and the scenery and the background and things like that.
But the Byzantines are trying to express.
That is why we have the expressionism, which was developed in France, I think, in the 18th century.
For the Byzantine, it was something very old.
And that's so remarkable, too, is this book has been used.
Oh, yes.
You see books of ours that were done in France.
They've never been touched.
Yes, they are beautiful and beautiful because people paid a lot of money to have it done.
It's a trinket.
It's a decoration.
This was made to be used and to be revered.
And that is why you see here some gold is gone.
You see, because the hand of the priest was here in the edge and by touching some of it, it's gone.
Look at that.
Descendants to Hades.
This is the very presentation, the orthodox, the orthodox, the presentation of resurrection.
This is how Christ, because Christ died.
He doesn't die.
His life himself, itself.
But when he was resurrected, nobody has seen him.
Nobody knows how he was resurrected.
What do you see from the Renaissance?
You know, he's coming out,
holding the flag of Vatican, things like that.
It's ridiculous.
Ridiculous.
This is our resurrection, the resurrection of the souls from Hades.
And he resurrects the just from the Old Testament first, as well as people like Plato who are waiting for him and Aristotle.
Dante puts them in purgatory.
They can never go to... No comment.
And here we have the ascension.
Ascension or Assumption?
Assumption.
And Pentecost, which closed the whole divine stewardship and begins the new era, the Church.
And here you have the Twelve Apostles, even Paul.
Although historically he wasn't there, yet he is there because in God's mind he was already an apostle before all ages.
That's Expressionism.
Exactly.
And you get the idea because eventually Paul surpassed all the apostles, you know, in everything, without meaning that they are at least, but you can see the meanings, you know, what's behind all this.
You can see also they're holding Gospels, but they wrote the Gospels three decades, two or three decades later on.
This is Pentecost, how it is represented.
The energies of the Holy Spirit
They're coming to man, and they became, they were cleansed, the first stage, cleansed from their passions, illuminated, and then being perfect as Christ was.
This is vellum, right?
This is parchment.
Parchment, yes, same.
I'm sorry, I didn't know the name.
Well, that's made from animals still.
Exactly.
What was it, what?
Vellum.
Parchment is the same thing.
I never heard it.
That's why I said parchment.
I didn't know that it's the same thing.
Well, it's a villain.
Maybe a... Pergament.
Pergament.
Or Pergament.
Yes, I did.
You were there.
I know that.
I write about that story in the book I'm going to send you.
Now, I can see the writing, and I'm sure that this is coming from professional calligraphers.
Whereas, here, he's not a professional calligrapher.
He's very good in the maps.
But his writing is not very good.
Because the man wasn't a calligrapher.
Yet he wanted to write on these things and he presented.
But here we have a professional... And we're thankful that he did.
Of course, of course.
He wasn't a professional in everything.
He was a very good geographer but not a very good writer.
Here we have an excellent calligrapher and I'm sure this is coming from the palaces of Byzantium.
Calligraphy-like.
This one, which also comes from the emperor.
Where is it?
It's here.
This style of calligraphy.
How old is that?
This is 1301, according to a German expert lady.
We will go back to that.
But I'm making this.
It looks very much the same.
This style, like this style over here, which is a scroll, liturgical scroll, of the kneeling prayers on Pentecost,
And the style is very much the same.
Big letters, beautifully homemade, if you come and see them.
It's the same school.
Maybe not the same person, but the same school.
And when we see this kind of writing, we know this is from the palace.
Did they make the parchment here on Atlas, or did they bring it in, do you think?
It's very difficult to make.
I'm sure they brought it here.
I know that paper
Well, we had paper even before the Italians actually, from the Alps.
But then it was cheaper for us and we had it from Italy.
So I suppose also partially.
Besides, we do not have ghosts here.
You couldn't do it.
You cannot have female... To make one Gutenberg Bible to 250 sheep.
And they call that on vellum, by the way.
There are Gutenberg Bibles on paper and some on vellum, which is part of it.
But they say, say, 250 sheep.
No, I don't know how many of these are slaughtered.
I'm sure as many as the old Israel used to sacrifice to God.
Now, here we have something from a very important emperor, Constantine de Monomachos, who was the second, if I'm not mistaken, or the third, let's say one of the first Byzantine emperors, who said that this is going to be a monastic state, no one can come here because the monks for spiritual reasons want to be away from marriage and things like this, etc., etc., etc.,
It will be protected and it gives rights and things like that.
This is his personal sultra.
The sultra that he was using.
You can see his red signature.
Only he could use red ink, as well as... And it's Constantine?
Constantine the Monomarchus.
He's in the book also.
I think he's the ninth.
Constantine the ninth, if I'm not mistaken.
He lived in the 11th century, gave many rights to the monastery and to all Athos.
That's an 11th century sultan.
Yes, and it was his own personal, and he gave it to the monastery.
And again, you can see the calligraphy in small letters, how beautiful.
And he gave it to the monastery in the 11th century.
Yes.
And it's been here ever since.
It was used.
I'm sure it was used by many.
But it's been here in the monastery.
Exactly.
And you can see how beautiful the ink.
See the ink?
As if it was done yesterday.
Perfect.
And I said, again, I repeat, we have another 20 manuscripts which we discovered.
Nobody knows about them in such a perfect condition.
From the palace again, from Byzantium.
Now, let's continue.
with the codices, and then we go to the documents.
We don't have to do all of these, by the way.
I will, if you're not tired.
Because I feel demoted now, I want to throw everything.
Okay.
So, I will be brief.
This is the oldest manuscript of the monastery.
Ninth century, completed manuscript.
Because we have a few even before the ninth century.
Which are fragments.
Which are fragments like this one here, which is only one page from the sixth century.
This is completed, ninth century.
And what is it?
It is the commentary on the Sons of David by one of the Fathers of the Church called Theodoritos, Bishop of Tyros, or Cyrus maybe in English, of Syria.
Syria was also a province of the Romans and then of the Byzantines.
And that's a fragment from the 6th century.
The fragment is from the Gospel of the 6th century in majuscule writing, as you can see.
Whereas this is one of the very first codices in the miniscule writing.
And did I say 9th century?
You said 9th.
I think it is 8th.
Let me think.
The miniscule writing begins.
In the 9th?
Yes, in the 9th century.
It's 800.
So it's 9th.
It's 9th, yes.
Whereas the other are also fragments from Gospels from the 9th, 10th, 11th.
We had a fire.
According to experts, a fire must have happened, unfortunately, somewhere in the monasteries, and we lost many documents and mosques.
And that is one of the reasons why the possibility that we have here
Because it's far away.
This fortress really helped very much.
Who brought them here?
Who brought them?
The fathers of the monastery in 1867.
They decided to bring everything here.
From all over?
The monastery.
And here we have a palimpsis codex.
And I can see it gives you a lot of... What do you call it?
What kind of codex?
Palimpsis codex.
Oh, that's a palimpsest.
Palimpsest, which... Yes, yes, yes.
...demoni.
It's a magical writing, you can see it here, with the eye here, from the 8th century.
So this must be also 8th century.
No, no, no.
8th century.
Last night.
And don't let me say anything else.
in the 8th century in the Manju school speeches of Saint Chrysostom on the Pauline letters and 500 years later on in the 13th century somebody who could find access easily to the Chrysostomian work because he was the most popular and is the most popular Byzantine church father regarding his writings he decided to
And it was not easy to find another parchment to do this.
Everything is in parchment, by the way.
He tried to scratch as much as he could beyond writing.
And we have the new one, which is in the 13th century.
500 years old.
And they did this.
And it is a very rare ascetical work.
Which, the one on top or the one underneath?
The one on the top.
Yes.
The one underneath is Chrysostomos, 8th century.
On the top, 13th century.
Which is more important as text?
As a text, the 13th century.
Really?
Because the 8th century, we have many.
We have many other copies.
Many of Chrysostomos.
When we go to the collection on the top of the library, we shall see many Chrysostomian works.
It was very popular.
And it's an ascetical work by Saint Antiochus, a monk who lived at the famous monastery of Saint Saba in Palestine.
And here, this is paper.
During the Dark Age of the Turkish Dominion, we still have some people who had inherited the Byzantine skills.
It's a monk who became a bishop eventually, named Gregory, of this monastery.
And in this beautiful codex, he wrote in big letters, mini-school writings, but big mini-school writings, so that the priest won't have any problems in reading them.
And this is St.
John Chrysostomos.
And the second part is St.
Basil, the two most important liturgies of the Orthodox Church.
Where is it?
Somewhere.
And you can see the very first letters.
That's paper.
It's remarkably... It's paper, but it's really... It's excellent.
We call it fox.
There's been no foxing, no oxidization of this paper.
It's beautiful.
It's a beauty.
And you say from the Dark Ages?
What years were these again?
Middle of the 17th century.
For us, there's no Middle Ages, Dark Ages.
But you said, you know, the Dark Ages of the Turkish domination.
Exactly.
These are for the Byzantines, the Greeks.
I understand.
This is the Dark Ages.
Now, we left one thing.
This is an edict by Antiochus Pallion Lombo II.
And he is doing what?
He is writing in this document all the things that
His predecessors have given to the monastery and he acknowledges them and gives additional things like properties, money, protection, items of art.
And you can see this big signature.
And he signs, and this is very interesting, history has been twisted very much due to the Florence and the Vatican.
It signs as the faithful king
an emperor of the Romans.
The word Byzantine Empire is something by a scholar in the 16th century.
See, the Byzantines never called themselves Byzantines.
That's a neologism, is what we call it.
We call ourselves Romni, even today.
Romni.
Roman, it was a name for the people who were under the Roman Empire, and then
the new Roman Empire, that is what we call Byzantine today.
And there were Greeks, there were Syrians, Egyptians, Armenians, Italians, Spanish, north of Africa.
Then Islam came and took many of these provinces.
And then the Germanic tribes came and saw the western side of the Roman Empire.
But we still have the Eastern Roman Empire intact.
which is called conventional Byzantine Empire.
You will have to use that in order to make a differentiation.
But they never did.
They always called themselves Romans.
And many, many other things.
Russia, many, many other things.
Because there are many information here which nobody knew.
Let's go back to the documentary.
We have seen these two from the liturgical, but it came from the palace of the Byzantine Eucharist.
This came from the Ecumenical Patriarch, who is at Constantinople till today, and is a saint, Philotheos, who was a monk here.
Became an abbot in Lavra, and eventually he became the Ecumenical Patriarch.
He was very important
during the period of the 14th century, when there was a clash between Western and Eastern theology, which was politics behind it as well, the rational ideas of the West, you know, scholasticism, versus spiritualism, because in the West they lost the purpose.
God became man, so man should become God through the divine energies.
They began saying, we can't receive God, He's unapproachable, like the ancient Greeks used to say, because they didn't have the Reformation or the Old Testament.
And also they were saying things like, paradise is a beautiful place, which we will go there.
Whereas one thing, paradise is not a beautiful place, it's a union with God, it's a deification.
This is salvation.
Salvation means to become complete.
The Greek word is sotiria, which means to be,
sword, wand.
I say these words because your daughter is wrong.
They will help you with this.
Now, here we have a very important document, just three years after the fall of Constantinople, 1456, by a Spanish king who was a very Philhellen, because many scholars fled from Byzantium when they saw the Turks coming,
They went to the West, they brought many of the books also with them, as well as their own artists, whether they were musicians, writers, historians, astronomers, etc., etc.
And Renaissance owes a lot of it, regarding science and arts, to these people who went to the courts of kings in Spain, in Italy, in France.
a revival, many things in the West.
He is actually threatening the people here.
Whoever makes a piracy against the monastery, he will be fined with 10,000 gold.
Whoever makes a what against the monastery?
If anyone makes a piracy against the monastery, he will be fined with 10,000 gold and fiorines, which is about millions of dollars today.
And he had the strongest fleet in the western Mediterranean fleet.
And although the Turks were here, we used this in order to be protected also from the Turks, but as well as from the pirates, because the Turks wouldn't harm the pirates if the pirates harmed the Greeks.
And the pirates wouldn't dare to quarrel with the Ottoman Empire, which was very strong.
And both were willing to kill them.
But they were, for them it was easy to come over here and do whatever they would like to do.
Peaceful people.
Yes, and so this was very, very important.
As well as this one here, a Turkish human by the grandfather of Mohammed, the Conqueror, in which
What's behind this?
This is actually a copy.
We made many copies of this, so all the monarchs would have one of this copy.
And it talks, it was issued, I think, in the 13th or 14th century.
And it says in the ancient Turkish writing, which looks like Arabic, that no Muslims, no heathens, no female, no female animals, no pirates, no, no, no, no, can come to this holy place.
And the grandson of this man, this man was Murat, Murat who was the chief of the Turkish people in the 14th century.
His grandson, Mohammed, who conquered Constantinople, and as I said, his mother was Orthodox and some say that he was a Crypto-Christian.
That is why he embraced the Orthodox Church diplomatically
And the office of the church survived.
They didn't kill all the priests and destroy all the churches and all the monasteries, you know.
They didn't write down.
God knows how to deal the deal.
My machine was off for about five minutes.
You see, I'm constantly checking the time.
All right.
And I always mark so I know where to go.
And there was one very important quote that you gave me that you said,
For a number of years, you didn't allow Westerners in here, because they... Could you kind of think about that again, just those few comments about why Westerners weren't allowed in here?
First of all, because, as we said, historically speaking, the Westerners, when acid crusaders came here, they destroyed, instead of liberating the Holy Land,
They destroyed the Byzantine Empire and they conquered the Empire.
Although they were Christians, supposedly, they were so cruel that when the Turks came two centuries later on, they said, it's better to have the Turks on our heads than what the Pope is wearing.
They didn't want to have anything with the Westerners because they saw that they were completely betrayed by them.
Crusaders came in 1204 in Constantinople and they were raiding the nuns.
Burn thousands of manuscripts like this.
Try to destroy the Roman Empire so that they will be conceived as the Roman Empire.
We were saying more recently, you wouldn't let people come in to see this book.
Because, as I said, the historical reason, the people became kind of prejudiced with whatever was coming from the West.
We see a lot of evil coming from there.
Also, recently, Tischerdorf, who stole manuscripts from Sider, others who came here and cut
Unfortunately, we have a few manuscripts in which you will see black holes there.
And how did that happen?
People left them alone?
They were trusting of these people?
They trusted the Westerners, Germans.
They trusted them with the books.
Yes.
And they would slice them out.
Exactly.
And they were using, usually, shaving razors.
Razor glands.
Razor glands, exactly.
Now, now,
Of course, things are different.
They're professionals and they respect it more than anybody else.
And we trust them.
You satisfy yourself of their bona fides, too.
I'm sure they have to demonstrate who they are.
Of course.
That is why Father said, well, you're coming from.
That's right.
And I respect that.
Because we had a lot of these kind of things, you know.
or they stole it.
They took five robes, right?
And when they were leaving, they gave four, or they took one and ran out.
Or, as I said, the British guy from this geography cut the two pieces, two pages, where they have the maps of England, Britain, Ireland, as well as the globe.
You think they would return it, don't you?
No, no.
Have you asked?
We will, we have, but, you know, the man who runs the British Museum for the Elgin Marble as well, you know, he has said behind the scenes, if I give all these things, I have to hear, we have to shut down the museum.
No.
Besides, we were not very professionals ourselves in Greece in order to protect the Western.
The West had technology.
We lost the technology because we were slaves to the Turks.
So there is the bright side behind this evil thing of stealing and buying and cheating and things like that because many things were preserved in the West.
That's right.
But now it's time to return them.
They took care of them.
They preserved them.
Those pages belong here.
As I said, they will never come back, but they are there.
You know, there's always precedent.
Denmark gave Iceland back their Icelandic sagas, you know, very recently.
Extraordinary, almost unprecedented.
They said, these belong to you.
And so they have them.
It's not easy.
We have, for example, a lot of difficulties with the double oaks to give us one mosaic icon, which is because there are 19 in the whole world.
We have two here.
which are in the treasury, are accessible.
The third one is at Dabartot Oaks, and we have to do that.
But we hope, if we do it in New York, that the people will be willing to... I'd be amazed if they didn't do it.
And we are doing everything according to the letter.
We have insurance companies, we have brought experts from all the museums to come here to talk exactly.
what it is, how was the price, how it will be transported, when.
It's a big, big, big thing.
We hope that it will begin in 1999.
Next year.
And it will go to Athens, Cyprus, London, Germany, Brussels.
That's huge.
And...
Maybe New York or something?
Maybe New York as well.
I'm pushing them to go to America because I was there and I'm saying to people here, go to America.
Go to America.
There are many people there.
They will appreciate it.
I know it.
I was there.
Well, the exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum was remarkable.
And we can do better.
We have thousands and thousands of things and we do not appreciate it and present it.
And we are not going there.
We're not going just to place items like it was done in Salonika.
We want items, good lighting, a few labels maybe.
No, no, no.
We're going to make an atmosphere of an afterlife in the monastery.
You will enter it as if you are in the monastery.
You will enter as if you are in the church.
And there you will find models and inscriptions and many, many information so that people can sit there and learn all the history about the rank, whatever, if it is a holy chalice or if it's a manuscript.
And they will know what is in there.
They don't have to have the tape recording telling them, oh, somebody like me who is blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
But this will all be from Vardopevi.
From Vardopevi.
And what will the name of the exhibition be?
Do you know yet?
What you will call it?
You still haven't decided in front of it.
Maybe they have decided, but I never thought of asking about that.
We cannot follow the same as the name of this exhibition.
It's going to be an international exhibition of heirlooms, of water pevy, which were given or stolen, we want to say, of course, stolen, which are found, we shall say, more diplomatically, in museums and libraries from Moscow to
Where is that?
Washington DC to Moscow, London, Paris, Athens.
We have museums also in Athens, unfortunately.
How can we have museums in Athens?
Well, after the liberation, when half of Greece was freed, they brought to us
politics again.
I have to tell them.
They brought to us German kings.
They had secularization, Protestant ideas.
They destroyed 450 monasteries in a few days, forced the monks and nuns to get married, and took all the treasures and took them to, you will see them in Berlin and in Paris and Britain and everywhere else,
That's another reason why we are very reluctant with the Westerners.
I think I have given you many reasons.
Yes, yes.
And they eventually kept a few relics in Athens and they said, we will make a Byzantine museum also for the Greeks.
As well, we are going to make a Byzantine museum in Germany, in France and everywhere.
And they went to destroy monasticies because monasticies in Orthodoxy is the heart bone, and the eyes, and the head.
Always people trusted above all the fathers from the monasteries.
And the bishops of the Orthodox Church were traditionally monks.
Unfortunately, many are coming from
I'm not writing about that, though.
But I know that you're suffering with, you have problems with the new archbishop.
Yes.
Very, very serious troubles, actually.
But we didn't see the whole idea before we were, let me brief.
This is another big chapter.
In a few words, we have Byzantine Vatopadian musicians from the 11th century.
This is 14th century, this is 19th century.
Old Byzantine writing notation, musical notation, new one, which was more plain in the 19th century, because this is very complex.
And we have music by Vatopadians, which was haunted somewhere, and now we discover
the manuscripts, the author is from 1050, and we are tripping in the church and also making CDs and cassettes as well as videos lately for people to understand.
And these have recently been found?
Yes.
Again, where?
In the cells of monks?
Where have you found them?
The manuscripts?
Yes.
No, they were here... But people were studying them, because there's so much material.
How much can you study?
They studied them, as I said, after 1912, because the Turkish were here until 1912.
When the Nazis came here, they were destroying Greece everywhere, but after, they respected others.
Why?
I'll tell you a story.
It's really interesting.
The Germans
had as allies not only the Italians, but also the Bulgarians, even the Russians in the beginning, as you know.
Now the Bulgarians, they were very loyal to the Germans, so the Germans allowed them to do whatever they liked.
So many rebels, Bulgarians, who always wanted to conquer Greece and make it part of big Bulgaria, some of them came to Iarisos, a little village from the eastern side,
the gate of the eastern side of Athos.
They were about to come in and make Athos Bulgarian.
After 950 years.
Yes, and have in mind that the Bulgarians, the forefathers of Bulgarian were Turks, who were criminals.
I mean, they were savages.
There were Turks criminals, which the Turks couldn't stand.
Which the Turks couldn't stand.
And they sent them from when they were in the middle, in the heart of Asia.
Because the Turks are, you know, Mongols over there.
They're very diverse.
And they went to Bolga, Russia.
And we gave them land, Christianity, writing, St.
Cyril and Methodius, Cyrillian writing, familial, Byzantine missionaries.
And eventually,
They wanted to plug out our eyes.
And they never stopped.
Although they always defeated, thank God.
So when the Germans occupied Greece, they came behind them.
The Germans didn't care because they were allies.
Do whatever you like.
So we went to the commander here.
He said, something like that.
I don't know how you put it on English.
No, that's it.
I understand that.
I don't care.
I don't care what that means.
They went to the general commander of Greece.
He said, I can't do anything.
They are allies and things like that.
So the father said, OK.
They prayed, they prayed, and they prayed, and they said, all right.
One of them said, we shall send a letter to Hitler himself, to Berlin,
and asked him to become the patron of Mount Athos.
So they sent the letter.
There was a monk here who had studied in Switzerland, Father Erasmus, and he had a doctorate from there.
And he knew fluent German because he was in the German parts of Switzerland.
And they sent it immediately to Fhrer.
He was very much flattered because he said, you see, holy man,
people of arts, people of civilization, the Athonite minds.
They understand what I'm trying to do, the new order that I want to do.
They want me to be their patron.
And while you're living, they said, we are in danger of the Bulgarians.
Could you do anything?
The next morning there wasn't even a Bulgarian nose.
So others were preserved.
No.
Miracles work in strange ways, don't they?
Oh, yes.
This is from the Tsar, 17th century.
He's giving us money, rights, such as in Russia, etc., etc.
You can see here, they're using the two-ingles.
Oh, yes.
This is Roman Byzantine emblem, which the Tsars, as well as the princes of Moldavia,
you are using, because they are the continuation of the Christian Roman Empire, which is called Byzantine Empire.
And where would this come was the idea?
Beautiful.
The seal.
Of course, the seal of the Byzantine Emperor.
You have Christ, and that is his seal.
Yes, the golden seal.
is him and his monogram.
And what does that particular seal date from?
1301.
This is from 1301?
Exactly.
And this came with that seal?
Of course.
That makes it official.
Whereas it looks like cheese.
You can see that
These people, the Russians and the Romanians, they wanted to be the continuation of the Byzantines, but as Father Artenius said, they couldn't attain that profession of the Byzantines.
And this is from the emperors.
You can see the difference in the arts, in the style, you know, big things, but more fine things.
And what else do we have?
And we have also, at the last display, one of the priest books.
It's a gospel from Venice.
It's 1,699, something like that.
600s, 1600s.
And it's a liturgical gospel for the use of the priest in the church in Venice.
We can...
see a little bit of it.
We have John.
The very first is Pascha, because Pascha is the most important thing in the Western Church.
Because this is important.
Whereas in the Western Church there's no Pascha.
The very Christ, but you want to see him in the resurrection.
Do you see him?
No.
Do you see him in Christmas?
But Christmas is the beginning.
Resurrection is
the whole meat of the whole people.
That's right, the essence.
This is the essence.
To conquer death, to become immortal, to become sons of God.
Somebody has handwritten something out there.
Yes, somebody was using it.
And it's giving dates.
It's not easy to write.
He says, ah, Theologos.
Ah, he says, Oaios, Ioannis or Theologos.
This is why Ioannis is a Theologos.
And then he says, Cata Ioannis, the Evangelion Cata Ioannis, the Gospel according to John.
Probably he wrote that so that he could read these just before beginning the Gospel.
I see, yes.
I don't know whether this is everywhere.
It's a beautiful one.
As I said, we couldn't have any press, and that is where you see Venice, Paris, Leipzig.
The classics which we have are coming from Oxford, from Hamburg, from Berlin, Vienna.
OK, we've finished here.
Let's go upstairs.
No.
You're very kind, I have to tell you, Father.
I'm very inspired from the movies.
Now, we are going to speak about the printed books.
Here we have 1,000 books.
I know, because I counted one.
Some years ago, I sat down and I placed them.
They will be, most of them, taken to the new library because they are 20th century.
Many of them are 20th century.
Whatever is 19th and back, it's going to stay here.
And now we're going to see books, books and books, endless books.
You will get the smell.
Which I love.
You know that you love.
Here you can see security things here.
Also, here it says, you don't see that in monasteries in the West.
When you go to the library, it's a cold library.
Everything is perfect, beautiful.
But you don't see things like
A bell.
And a chapel.
Because the monk here was praying also.
Because it's dedicated to the birth of the Virgin, 8th of... The birth of the Virgin, 8th of September.
That's a movement.
That's registering movement.
It doesn't necessarily go up, but it's always registered as a sensor device.
I'm not very good in machines, so I don't want to make any money.
So, you can see all kinds of things.
Whatever was published in the West, in Greek, and also in Latin, if it was religious, but also whatever in Greek, regarding all kinds of scientists, all kinds of Asian scientists, they were buying them.
Now, who was buying them?
The monastery.
Why?
So that was policy.
Yes.
Policy to buy everything.
To buy everything, even if it wasn't for you.
Why?
Because we wanted to preserve our heritage.
And because in the end of the 18th century, on that hill up there, you will see the ruins of the first college.
He made a college.
I saw it on the way down.
And through that college, people like Cosmothetolos, does that ring a bell?
Yes, yes it does.
Nicodemus and others, they made, they call it the Greek Enlightenment.
We don't like this word because it's a different place.
Enlightenment, the word was different.
Here it was actually surviving.
To survive,
the Classics and the Byzantines, our identity.
So, I'm sorry, these were being brought how far back?
From the very beginning of Gutenberg, from the very beginning, yes.
So the attitude has always been to acquire knowledge.
Yes, because eventually we had this college, today it's a high school, and it is one with the St.
Andrew Street,
which we spoke together at Caries.
And it's still a high school with 100 kids.
What was the name of the college?
I think you have written back to me again.
You will see a special chapter on that.
In the book.
All these people then became educated.
All these people, either with their pen or with missionary,
or with a gun.
Great revolution in 1821, just a few years after this academy.
This is remarkable.
This is great.
Better than I expected.
By preserving the knowledge and faith, especially the faith, we get our identity and we manage to know who we are
and that we shouldn't be any longer the slaves of these barbaric people.
We have such noble ancestors, which we have to continue, although we're not at their peak, their style, their class, but we have to... So when books were first being published, they could afford to buy them, too.
Immediately.
But they had the money to do it.
Oh, yes.
Because, as I said, the czars of Russia...
the Moldavia, Transylvania, Prince, they were giving us money.
Also, many times, Greeks who were living in the West because they couldn't bear the dominion here, and they had money, they were publishing books, and they were sending the books in libraries, and especially in Monathos, where we had freedom here.
There was a freedom.
Of course, freedom
Relative.
If you don't do anything harm.
They didn't harm us because, as I said, the addict down there, the Mohammed and things like that.
Now, during the revolution, we helped the revolution, and then they came and they killed the monks and they stole, and thousands had to leave, and for ten years they were roaming here and there, taking the lead from the top of the churches.
in order to make them bullets and guns and many, many, many things.
But thank God they were kicked out and the monks came back.
But we lost many heirlooms, many... They were stealing a beautiful chalice because it had gold.
They were destroying the chalice just to get the gold.
But the chalice had also marble, had also silver,
had also art on it, but they were just maledict in order to me.
That's what we call a Philistine.
I know.
This is from the Old Testament.
Now, this is the cross of the Great with St.
Helen and the cross, the real Holy Cross that discovered in Jerusalem, and then all the emperors that followed from 3.30 until 14.53.
Some of them are Latins.
We don't like them at all, because they were from France and they were actually pseudo-eparos, they were actually cointos.
And what does this chart date from?
Approximately.
It doesn't matter, but it's very old.
It is very old, definitely.
That's right.
And the language is not the modern, modern Greek.
It's Greek of 100 years old.
It doesn't matter, I would just, if you know, it would be interesting.
I really don't know.
And also gives you here the Hellenistic background as well, you know.
Alexander the Great, Theos of Christ, which were used by Athos, Achilleus, you know, Homer.
We have also books which are in German, in French, in English, because there were fathers who were educated here.
And the fathers here were the ones who were the teachers or the children.
And in some manuscripts we have discovered, you know, they play with caricatures or they try to learn the alphabet using the back of the manuscript of the 19th century, you know, things like that.
So there's no way any living person could ever go through even a fraction of this whole library.
No, this is the goody.
This is the what?
The goody.
It's a word which I learned in the USA.
Oh, the goody.
Top floor.
This is the third floor?
Third floor.
And here are round.
of this perimetrical library, we have printed books, all printed books, and in the middle we have the library.
Now they have been cleared by graduate students from Salonika, from the University of Salonika, and they will be placed in these for protection purposes, because they are here like we for safety.
And around here we have books, labels which are attractive literature, Gregor theologian, Basil the Great, Chrysostomos is somewhere all the way to John Tabarthi, Chrysostomos, you see how many Chrysostomos, he was very, look Chrysostomos, look Chrysostomos, the big volumes, very popular, that is why the palentists.
Here we have also classes.
We have classes, but it's still Byzantine.
Byzantine, Byzantine.